[DataGridPro] Allow to group rows based on column value (#3277)
mui-org/material-ui-x: docs/src/pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/group-pivot.md

<p class="description">Use grouping, pivoting, and more to analyze the data in depth.</p>

> ## Row grouping [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](https://mui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Row grouping [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](https://mui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/)
```
Since this is a sort of superset of the tree view, should it come after that section? Or perhaps have its own page? (The page is quite long now).

Author: I don't see the row grouping as a superset of the Tree Data but as a different way of grouping
On the Tree Data, each rows gives it's position in the Tree, the groups are real rows.
On the Row Grouping, the position is deduced from the other rows, the groups are fake rows.
[AG Grid](https://www.ag-grid.com/javascript-data-grid/grouping/) is putting "Row Grouping" before, I think because it is the most complete / generic feature and the Tree Data doc refers a lot to the "Row Grouping" doc for shared behavior.

For the split, I agree that the page is long. I propose we wait for https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/30091 and then we split the big pages like the Filtering / Columns / Group Pivot pages.
Unless it's really to long for you in which case we can split it now. Just we won't have the additional depth on the sidebar to create a "Group & Pivot" section containing all the new pages extracted from the `group-pivot` page.

Reviewer: Perhaps superset was the wrong word, but the point was that row grouping builds on the features of the tree view, so it makes sense to introduce that first to build foundational knowledge. (Not that people necessarily read the content in a linear manner, but at least to guide the reader if they happen to.

Reviewer: Happy to wait for the restructure to decide what and where to split.

Author: Do we agree that what you call "tree view" is the Tree Data in the Data Grid doc ?

Reviewer: Yes, sorry, mixing my terminology

> Use grouping columns to group the rows according to one or several columns value</p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use row grouping to group the rows according to one or several column values</p>
```
Thanks for changing the name. There are a few more leftovers like this, so I won't try to suggest them all.

Author: I forgot most of those on the doc page indeed.
Done :+1:

<p class="description">Use grouping, pivoting, and more to analyze the data in depth.</p>

## Row grouping [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](https://mui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/)

> Use row grouping to group the rows according to one or several columns value</p>

Reviewer 2: @joserodolfofreitas To improve the review process, use the "suggestion" button to suggest text that should be replaced. That way it's clear if we should use the comment text as replacement or not. 😛

<img width="400" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/42154031/149337736-af1a0bdc-4cdc-4bfb-a6bb-1d322b875d32.png" alt="msedge_6C62YObfuk" style="max-width: 100%;">

> Use row grouping to group the rows according to one or several columns value</p>

Author: Not sure what to replace with this sentence indeed :+1:

You can use the `onRowGroupingModelChange` prop to listen to changes to the page size and update the prop accordingly.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingControlled.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Disable the row grouping

#### For all columns

To fully disable the grouping feature, set the `disableRowGrouping` prop to `true`.

It will disable all the features related to the row grouping, even if a model is provided.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingDisabled.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

#### For some columns

To block the grouping of certain columns, set the `groupable` property of `GridColDef` to `false`.
In the example below, the `director` column can not be grouped. And in all example, the `title` and `gross` columns can not be grouped.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingColDefCanBeGrouped.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Grouping columns

#### Single grouping column

By default, the grid will create only one grouping column even if you have several grouping criteria.

> 

Author: Maybe:

```
By default, the grid will create only one grouping column.
If you have multiple grouping criteriaes, this column header name will be set to "Group".
```

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingCustomGroupingColDefObject.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

If you want to only override properties of certain grouping columns or to apply different overrides based on the current grouping criteria, use the callback format of `groupingColDef`.
It will be called for each grouping column with the fields of the columns used to build it.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingCustomGroupingColDefCallback.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

#### Show values for the leaves

By default, the leaves nodes don't render anything for their grouping cell.

If you want to display some value, you can provide a `leafField` property to the `groupingColDef`.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingLeafWithValue.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

#### Hide the descendant count

You can use the `hideDescendantCount` property of the `groupingColDef` to hide the amount of descendant of a grouping row.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingHideDescendantCount.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> ### Complex grouping value

Reviewer 3: ### Using 'keyGetter' for complex grouping value

> In most scenarios, when you need to handle complex values, you provide a `valueGetter` property to your column definition.

Reviewer 3: The `keyGetter` is a new property on the column definition object.
It's analogous to the known `valueGetter`, which is used to handle objects and other complex values.

The difference between the two is that the `keyGetter` is designed to provide an specific value for grouping, without requiring you to change the displayed value (`valueGetter`).

Author: I rephrased with @m4theushw proposal first, which has the same content but with a better formulation.
I think we need to decide for this `valueGetter` => `keyGetter` chaining or not before writing the final sentence.

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by "chaining"?

A different topic: isn't `keyGetter` a too broad name? Putting `valueGetter` aside and there's no clue of the difference between them. Should it have "group" in the name?

Author: We had a discussion with @joserodolfofreitas about whether the value passed to `keyGetter` should be the value returned by `valueGetter` or not.

We can rename it `groupingKeyGetter` if it seems clearer.

Author: > Suppose we have a "City" column composed of city + state (e.g. "Los Angeles, CA"), then it could be grouped either by the city name or the state.

It adds an additional layer of complexity.
Nothing impossible to manage, we could add a `groupingCriteria` property on `GridColDef`.
But I would wait for users needs for that one.

Reviewer 3: I agree the keyGetter as a name could be improved with "groupingKeyGetter", or even better with "groupingValueGetter", so the correlation with the valueGetter usage is more clear.

Author: In which case I guess we are removing the chaining and instead passing the raw value to `groupingValueGetter` right ?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I think that would make the most sense, the chaining doesn't feel like an intuitive assumption to make, in the sense that users who didn't read a specific line on the docs might get caught off guard.

But sometimes, you need to keep the object format for the `renderCell` property and thus can not convert it to a serializable value in `valueGetter`.

> 
> You can then provide a `keyGetter` property in your column definition to convert this object into a serializable value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, pass a `keyGetter` property to the column definition to convert this object into a serializable value.
```

```ts
const columns: GridColumns = [
  {
    field: 'composer',
    keyGetter: (params) => params.value.name,
  },
  // ...
];
```

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingKeyGetter.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> If your column also have a `valueGetter` property, the value passed to the `keyGetter` property will be the one returned by `valueGetter`.

Reviewer 3: *as a note: if your column also have a `valueGetter` property, its value is used as the parameter for the `keyGetter` method.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingKeyGetterValueGetter.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Rows with missing groups

> If the grouping key of a grouping criteria is `null` or `undefined` for a row, the grid will consider that this row do not have a value for this group. and will inline it for those groups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the grouping key of a grouping criteria is `null` or `undefined` for a row, the grid will consider that this row does not have a value for this group. and will inline it for those groups.
```

<p class="description">Use grouping, pivoting, and more to analyze the data in depth.</p>

## Row grouping [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](https://mui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/)

For when you need to group rows based on repeated column values, and/or custom functions.

> {{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingSingleGroupingCol.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Reviewer 3: @flaviendelangle Can we have the first demo with a single criteria?
I'd then add a simple description for it like this:
"On the following example, we're grouping all movies based on their production **company**"

Author: You are right, done :+1:

```ts
initialState={{
    rowGrouping: {
        model: ['company', 'director'],
    }
}}
```

The basic parameters are the columns you want to check for repeating values.
In this example, we want to group all the movies matching the same company name, followed by a second group matching the director's name.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingInitialState.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

#### Controlled row grouping

If you need to control the state of the criteria used for grouping, use the `rowGroupingModel` prop.
You can use the `onRowGroupingModelChange` prop to listen to changes to the page size and update the prop accordingly.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingControlled.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Grouping columns

#### Single grouping column

By default, the grid will display a single column holding all grouped columns.
If you have multiple grouped columns, this column name will be set to "Group".

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingSingleGroupingCol.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

#### Multiple grouping column

> To display a column for each grouping criterion, set the `rowGroupingColumnMode` prop to `multiple.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To display a column for each grouping criterion, set the `rowGroupingColumnMode` prop to `multiple`.
```

By default, when using the object format, the properties will be applied to all Grouping columns. This means that if you have `rowGroupingColumnMode` set to `multiple`, all the columns will share the same `groupingColDef` properties.

If you wish to override properties of specific grouping columns or to apply different overrides based on the current grouping criteria, you can pass a callback function to `groupingColDef`, instead of an object with its config.
The callback is called for each grouping column, and it receives the respective column's "fields" as parameter.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingCustomGroupingColDefCallback.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

#### Show values for the leaves

By default, the grouped rows display no value on their grouping columns' cells. We're calling those cells "leaves".

If you want to display some value, you can provide a `leafField` property to the `groupingColDef`.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingLeafWithValue.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

#### Hide the descendant count

> Use the `hideDescendantCount` property of the `groupingColDef to hide the number of descendants of a grouping row.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the `hideDescendantCount` property of the `groupingColDef` to hide the number of descendants of a grouping row.
```

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingColDefCanBeGrouped.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Using 'keyGetter' for complex grouping value

In most scenarios, to handle complex values (e.g. nested structures), a `valueGetter` property must be provided to the column definition to convert it into a simple value.
But sometimes, you may want to keep the value in its raw format, to be used in a custom cell renderer, and thus using a value getter is not possible.
In this case, pass a `keyGetter` property to the column definition to convert this object into a serializable value.

```ts
const columns: GridColumns = [
  {
    field: 'composer',
    keyGetter: (params) => params.value.name,
  },
  // ...
];
```

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingKeyGetter.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

**Note**: If your column also have a `valueGetter` property, its value is used as the parameter for the `keyGetter` method.

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/RowGroupingKeyGetterValueGetter.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Rows with missing groups

> If the grouping key of a grouping criteria is `null` or `undefined` for a row, the grid will consider that this row does not have a value for this group. and will inline it for those groups.

Reviewer 2: We might need to change this behavior for #213. I see rows with `null` or `undefined` as another group, often times called "N.A.", "Empty", "Other", etc.

DevExpress groups them not matter the value. See https://codesandbox.io/s/gracious-ride-fo79o?file=/demo-data/generator.js

Author: https://www.ag-grid.com/javascript-data-grid/grouping-unbalanced-groups/

AG-Grid does not and suggest to use an arbitrary value to represent this groupable nullish values.

What would be blocking for #213 ?

Reviewer 2: > What would be blocking for #213 ?

I suppose that the aggregated values will be displayed in the group row or at the footer of the current group. If these rows don't belong to a group, there's no place to display the aggregated values.

Author: Not sure to follow you here.
My point was just that AG-Grid consider `null` and `undefined` as non-groupable values. Which enable the creation of unbalanced group (cf my link). In the Tree Structure, they are still in a group, the group with "no value" for this criteria.

For instance if you group by year and director and some movies don't have a director.
Then the movies with a director are in the groups:
- `[{ groupingField: 'year', groupingValue: 2020 }, { groupingField: 'director', groupingValue: 'A' }]`
- `[{ groupingField: 'year', groupingValue: 2020 }, { groupingField: 'director', groupingValue: 'B' }]`
- ...
- 
And the movies without a director are in the groups:
- `[{ groupingField: 'year', groupingValue: 2020 }]
- `[{ groupingField: 'year', groupingValue: 2019 }]
- ...

And for Aggregation, for me we could store the aggregated values on the node of the parent
Which would make us create a parent node for the top level rows (which don't exist right now but could easily be added).

As for where those values should be rendered, as you said AG-Grid has 2 places:
- The footer: https://www.ag-grid.com/javascript-data-grid/aggregation/, which looks like a row below the last row of the group
- The grouping row: https://www.ag-grid.com/javascript-data-grid/aggregation/

But as every row is in a group, I don't think unbalanced groups are an issue here.

Reviewer 2: In the link you added it doesn't group rows with `null` or `undefined`. In the "sum(Val1)" column for these rows there's the raw values instead. Anyway, it's a small detail that I would expect that grid would handle automatically, but we can keep the same behavior as AG Grid.

/>;
```

{{"demo": "pages/components/data-grid/group-pivot/TreeDataSimple.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Custom grouping column

> Same behavior as for the [Row grouping](##grouping-column-customization) except for the `leafField` and `mainGroupingCriteria` which are not applicable for the Tree Data.

Reviewer 4: This link is pointing to himself. The title you want to refer to has the same name but is `h4`. So it does not have ancor link.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure it is a good idea to replace [the tree demo](https://mui.com/components/data-grid/group-pivot/#custom-grouping-column) where developers learn how to completely override the grouping cell by a link to [row grouping](https://deploy-preview-3277--material-ui-x.netlify.app/components/data-grid/group-pivot/#grouping-columns) named "Custom grouping column" in which only the `headerName` prop is replaced

Author: Yeah you are probably right

Author: I added the demo back and pointed the anchor to he h3
